

Kongas2007 - Creatine Kinase in energy metabolic signaling in muscle

This model is described in the article:

[Creatine kinase in energy metabolic signaling in
muscle](http://identifiers.org/doi/10.1038/npre.2007.1317.1)

Olav Kongas and Johannes H. G. M. van Beek

Available from Nature Precedings

Abstract:

There has been much debate on the mechanism of regulation of mitochondrial ATP
synthesis to balance ATP consumption during changing cardiac workloads. A key
role of creatine kinase (CK) isoenzymes in this regulation of oxidative
phosphorylation and in intracellular energy transport had been proposed, but
has in the mean time been disputed for many years. It was hypothesized that
high-energy phosphorylgroups are obligatorily transferred via CK; this is
termed the phosphocreatine shuttle. The other important role ascribed to the
CK system is its ability to buffer ADP concentration in cytosol near sites of
ATP hydrolysis.

Almost all of the experiments to determine the role of CK had been done in the
steady state, but recently the dynamic response of oxidative phosphorylation
to quick changes in cytosolic ATP hydrolysis has been assessed at various
levels of inhibition of CK. Steady state models of CK function in energy
transfer existed but were unable to explain the dynamic response with CK
inhibited.

The aim of this study was to explain the mode of functioning of the CK system
in heart, and in particular the role of different CK isoenzymes in the dynamic
response to workload steps. For this purpose we used a mathematical model of
cardiac muscle cell energy metabolism containing the kinetics of the key
processes of energy production, consumption and transfer pathways. The model
underscores that CK plays indeed a dual role in the cardiac cells. The
buffering role of CK system is due to the activity of myofibrillar CK (MMCK)
while the energy transfer role depends on the activity of mitochondrial CK
(MiCK). We propose that this may lead to the differences in regulation
mechanisms and energy transfer modes in species with relatively low MiCK
activity such as rabbit in comparison with species with high MiCK activity
such as rat.

The model needed modification to explain the new type of experimental data on
the dynamic response of the mitochondria. We submit that building a Virtual
Muscle Cell is not possible without continuous experimental tests to improve
the model. In close interaction with experiments we are developing a model for
muscle energy metabolism and transport mediated by the creatine kinase
isoforms which now already can explain many different types of experiments.

The model has been designed according to the spirit of the paper. The list of
rate in the appendix has been corrected as follow:

  1. d[ATP]/dt = (-Vhyd -Vmmck +Jatp) / Vcyt
  2. d[ADP]/dt = ( Vhyd +Vmmck +Jadp) / Vcyt
  3. d[PCr]/dt = ( Vmmck +Jpcr ) / Vcyt
  4. d[Cr]/dt = (-Vmmck +Jpcr ) / Vcyt
  5. d[Pi]/dt = ( Vhyd + Jpi ) / Vcyt
  6. d[ATPi]/dt = (+Vsyn -Vmick -Jatp) / Vims
  7. d[ADPi]/dt = (-Vsyn +Vmick -Jadp) / Vims
  8. d[PCri]/dt = ( Vmick -Jpcr ) / Vims
  9. d[Cri]/dt = (-Vmick -Jpcr ) / Vims
  10. d[Pii]/dt = (-Vsyn -Jpi ) / Vims
  

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by: [BIOMD0000000041](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels-
main/BIOMD0000000041) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

